README.md, before:

# Build ITS2 databases

## Overview

its2Builder is a [Snakemake](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) pipeline to build databases of the eukaryotic ITS2 sequence for a given taxonomy.  It retrieves ITS2 annotated sequences, trims off 5.8S and 28S sequences if necessary and formats them for common pipelins like RDP, dada2 and mothur.

## Install :computer:

The only dependency to run the pipeline is an up-to-date conda install with a recent version of Snakemake.  If you don't already use conda then you can follow the instructions on the [Conda](https://conda.io/docs/user-guide/install/index.html) website.  Make sure to install the *Python 3* version of Miniconda.

Once conda is working then all you need to do is install Snakemake with:

```
conda install -c bioconda -c conda-forge snakemake
```

If you don't want to install Snakemake in your default environment then first create a new environment with Python 3 and Snakemake installed.

```
conda create -n its2Builder python=3 snakemake
```

Then activate it:

```
source activate its2Builder
```

Then you'll want to make sure you have an [NCBI account](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/account/) from which you'll get an API Key on the account setting page.

## Running the pipeline :gear: 

First clone the repository to a location desired:

```
git clone https://github.com/ucvm/its2Builder.git
```

### Configuration

Edit the `config.yaml` file with a file editor of your choice and adjust the following parameters as you see fit.

* *organism*: This is added to the NCBI search string to restrict the search to a taxonomy of interest.

* *out_directory*: Output directory to store the files.  Will be created if it doesn't exist

* *max_width*: The final sequences will be trimmed to be no more than this many basepairs long.

* *min_width*: As above but minimum width

* *return_trimmed*: Should sequences that didn't have a 5.8S or 28S be returned.  Default is TRUE.  See below for details

* *clusterid*: Percent identity to cluster sequences within each species.  Biggest cluster is used to generate a representative sequence for each species - details below.

* *ncbi_api*: Because this pipeline searchs the NCBI nucleotide database and downloads thousands of sequences it's required to have an account and API key (see above on how to get one).

* *threads*: The number of CPU threads that Snakemake can use to run jobs.

### Run it

Now run it with 2 threads:

```
snakemake -j 2 --use-conda
```

The output databases will be named by their format (see Details below) with `.fasta`.  The other files can be deleted to save space but usually aren't too big and can save time if you want to rerun some of the steps without re-downloading all the sequences again.

The first run will take a little bit longer as Snakemake will build the conda environments.  

### Compute requirements

Mostly time :hourglass:.  `cmscan` is the main time consuming process and can be sped up to some degree by providing more threads.  The pipeline doesn't require excesive memory and can likely be run on a decently powered desktop in a few hours. But this depends strongly on the number of sequences being downloaded. Snakemake has excellent support for compute clusters so if you have access to one this is recommended.  Please see the Snakemake documentation for more details on how to do this.  Also note that this will run on MacOS or Linux only as with the majority of bioinformatics applications.

## Details :mag:

### Step 1: Get sequences

This step utilizes the `rentrez` R package to search NCBI for sequences annoated as ITS2 for your given organism.  The exact search term is:

```
{organism}[ORGN] (ITS2 OR internal transcribed spacer 2)
```

where `{organsism}` is replaced with whatever is specified in the config file.

Taxonomy for each of the sequences is retrieved from NBCI Taxonomy with the `taxize` R package and then the fasta sequences are downloaded.

### Step 2: Trim sequences

Many of the ITS2 sequences will also contain the other ribosomal genes, especially the 5.8S and partial 28S genes.  To remove this [Infernal](http://eddylab.org/infernal/), specifically the `cmscan` program is used to find these additional genes.  Note that good sequences models for ITS2 don't really exist as this region is highly variable across species.

After the additional rRNA genes are identified the sequences are trimmed to this region.  If no additional rRNA genes were found the sequence is returned untouched if the `return_untrimmed` parameter is set.  Otherwise these are discarded.  It is suggested to leave this set to `TRUE` as many ITS2 sequences have been deposited to NCBI already trimmed to that region.

The sequences are then clipped to at most `max_width` and at minimum `min_width`.  Also any redundant sequences that may be present so the database is unique.

### Step 3:  Format database

Current the its2Builder outputs 3 common formats used for assigning taxonomy.  

* dada2: dada2's `assignTaxonomy` function
* RDP: to train a custom RDP database with the `rRDP` Bioconductor package (this is pretty much the same as `assignTaxonomy`)
* mothur: a fasta file and paired mothur taxonomy file.  Works with the [Nemabiome](https://www.nemabiome.ca/) pipeline.


## TODO :hammer:

* Add update step to avoid redownloading existing sequences
  - this will likely entail an ids file that lists all searched sequences
* Some sort of filtering on per species basis.  There are some clear outliers that need to be cleaned out.

## For the pros :trophy:

For doing it your own way the best bet is to fork the repository and edit away.  This way your changes will be preserved so you can publishe them properly!  Pull requests are welcome but need to be broadly useful and well tested.

Other typos/errors can also be corrected with pull requests or by submitting an issue.

Commit message:

updated README to reflect clustering

README.md, after:

# Build ITS2 databases

## Overview

its2Builder is a [Snakemake](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) pipeline to build databases of the eukaryotic ITS2 sequence for a given taxonomy.  It retrieves ITS2 annotated sequences, trims off 5.8S and 28S sequences if necessary and formats them for common pipelins like RDP, dada2 and mothur.

## Install :computer:

The only dependency to run the pipeline is an up-to-date conda install with a recent version of Snakemake.  If you don't already use conda then you can follow the instructions on the [Conda](https://conda.io/docs/user-guide/install/index.html) website.  Make sure to install the *Python 3* version of Miniconda.

Once conda is working then all you need to do is install Snakemake with:

```
conda install -c bioconda -c conda-forge snakemake
```

If you don't want to install Snakemake in your default environment then first create a new environment with Python 3 and Snakemake installed.

```
conda create -n its2Builder python=3 snakemake
```

Then activate it:

```
source activate its2Builder
```

Then you'll want to make sure you have an [NCBI account](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/account/) from which you'll get an API Key on the account setting page.

## Running the pipeline :gear: 

First clone the repository to a location desired:

```
git clone https://github.com/ucvm/its2Builder.git
```

### Configuration

Edit the `config.yaml` file with a file editor of your choice and adjust the following parameters as you see fit.

* *organism*: This is added to the NCBI search string to restrict the search to a taxonomy of interest.

* *out_directory*: Output directory to store the files.  Will be created if it doesn't exist

* *max_width*: The final sequences will be trimmed to be no more than this many basepairs long.

* *min_width*: As above but minimum width

* *return_trimmed*: Should sequences that didn't have a 5.8S or 28S be returned.  Default is TRUE.  See below for details

* *clusterid*: Percent identity to cluster sequences within each species.  Biggest cluster is used to generate a representative sequence for each species - details below.

* *ncbi_api*: Because this pipeline searchs the NCBI nucleotide database and downloads thousands of sequences it's required to have an account and API key (see above on how to get one).

* *threads*: The number of CPU threads that Snakemake can use to run jobs.

### Run it

Now run it with 2 threads:

```
snakemake -j 2 --use-conda
```

The output databases will be named by their format (see Details below) with `.fasta`.  The other files can be deleted to save space but usually aren't too big and can save time if you want to rerun some of the steps without re-downloading all the sequences again.

The first run will take a little bit longer as Snakemake will build the conda environments.  

### Compute requirements

Mostly time :hourglass:.  `cmscan` is the main time consuming process and can be sped up to some degree by providing more threads.  The pipeline doesn't require excesive memory and can likely be run on a decently powered desktop in a few hours. But this depends strongly on the number of sequences being downloaded. Snakemake has excellent support for compute clusters so if you have access to one this is recommended.  Please see the Snakemake documentation for more details on how to do this.  Also note that this will run on MacOS or Linux only as with the majority of bioinformatics applications.


## Details :mag:

### Step 1: Get sequences

This step utilizes the `rentrez` R package to search NCBI for sequences annoated as ITS2 for your given organism.  The exact search term is:

```
{organism}[ORGN] (ITS2 OR internal transcribed spacer 2)
```

where `{organsism}` is replaced with whatever is specified in the config file.

Taxonomy for each of the sequences is retrieved from NBCI Taxonomy with the `taxize` R package and then the fasta sequences are downloaded.

### Step 2: Trim sequences

Many of the ITS2 sequences will also contain the other ribosomal genes, especially the 5.8S and partial 28S genes.  To remove this [Infernal](http://eddylab.org/infernal/), specifically the `cmscan` program is used to find these additional genes.  Note that good sequences models for ITS2 don't really exist as this region is highly variable across species.

After the additional rRNA genes are identified the sequences are trimmed to this region.  If no additional rRNA genes were found the sequence is returned untouched if the `return_untrimmed` parameter is set.  Otherwise these are discarded.  It is suggested to leave this set to `TRUE` as many ITS2 sequences have been deposited to NCBI already trimmed to that region.

The sequences are then clipped to at most `max_width` and at minimum `min_width`.  Also any redundant sequences that may be present so the database is unique.

### Step 3: Clustering

A representative sequence for each species (or in this case taxonomic ID) is chosen by clustering the sequences within each species at a given identity threshold (default is 0.8).  Clustering is done with `vsearch --cluster_fast` and the consensus sequence from the largest cluster is returned.  Species with only a single sequence are returned as is.

### Step 4: Alignment

Although not required for many taxonomic classifiers, like RDP, some pipelines do require an alignment and both the clustered and non-clustered versions of the database are aligned using mafft.

### Step 5:  Format database

Current the its2Builder outputs 3 common formats used for assigning taxonomy.  Both the full and clustered versions are output.

* dada2: dada2's `assignTaxonomy` function
* RDP: to train a custom RDP database with the `rRDP` Bioconductor package (this is pretty much the same as `assignTaxonomy`)
* mothur: a fasta file and paired mothur taxonomy file.  Works with the [Nemabiome](https://www.nemabiome.ca/) pipeline.  An alignment is also written out that should work with mothur, but can also be used for other pipelines as needed.

The seqinfo.tsv file is a tab-separated text file that contains the taxonomy information for all sequences and can be easily imported into R or Python or (if you must) be opened in Excel.



## TODO :hammer:

* Add update step to avoid redownloading existing sequences
  - this will likely entail an ids file that lists all searched sequences
* Some sort of filtering on per species basis.  There are some clear outliers that need to be cleaned out.

## For the pros :trophy:

For doing it your own way the best bet is to fork the repository and edit away.  This way your changes will be preserved so you can publishe them properly!  Pull requests are welcome but need to be broadly useful and well tested.

Other typos/errors can also be corrected with pull requests or by submitting an issue.
